National Cancer Organizations:
?	Imerman Angels: Cancer mentorship program for Patients and caregivers www.imermanangels.org
?	American Cancer Society: Supportive Programs and assistance programs. www.cancer.org
?	National Cancer Institute: Research and supportive programs www.cancer.gov
?	CancerCare: Research and supportive programs www.cancercare.org
 
Head and Neck Cancer Specific Resources:
?	Support for People with Oral and Head and Neck Cancer (SPOHNC): Research, supportive programs, nationwide support groups. www.spohnc.org 
?	Head and Neck Cancer Alliance: Research, supportive programs and gas card assistance fund. www.headandneck.org
?	ThyCa: Thyroid cancer research and nationwide supportive programs. www.thyca.org 
?	The Oral Cancer Foundation: Research, advocacy, and supportive programs. www.oralcancerfoundation.org
?	International Association of Laryngectomees (IAL) Support for laryngectomees patients www.theail.com
?	Web Whispers Support for Throat Cancer and Laryngectomees. www.WebWhispers.org 
Stanford Services:
?	Stanford Supportive Care Program: Emotional, physical, and spiritual support through all stages of cancer survivorship. https://stanfordhealthcare.org/for-patients-visitors/cancer-supportive-care-program.html 
?	The Stanford Health Library: Located in the cancer center and offer supportive books, mindfulness and meditation CDs, all free to borrow. http://healthlibrary.stanford.edu/
Counseling and Therapy: 
?	The Therapy Directory: Nationwide directory of therapists- listing accepting insurances and specialty http://therapists.psychologytoday.com/rms/
?	Stanford Psycho Oncology: psychiatric consultation, brief therapy and emotional support to patients with cancer. Please speak with your doctor about a referral or call 650-498-6000.
?	KARA Palo Alto: Grief support, counselling, resources for individuals and families https://kara-grief.org/ 
Cancer Support Community Walnut Creek: Support groups, info sessions, counseling. www.cancersupport.net 
