EAT Through Radiation Treatment
A Program for Head and Neck Patients
Radiation to the head and neck can lead to long-term swallowing problems called dysphagia.
Patients with dysphagia have a hard time swallowing food, liquid or saliva. Swallowing problems can occur during treatment, or may develop or continue long after radiation treatment has ended.

Keeping swallowing muscles “active” during radiation helps maintain their function to prevent or lessen the severity of long-term dysphagia. It is important to keep eating during treatment, even if you have a feeding tube.

Swallowing thick or heavy foods is good exercise for your throat. But, side effects like pain, changes in saliva, and taste can make it hard or unpleasant to eat many solid foods, mainly in the last half of radiation. 

Eat All Through (EAT) Radiation Treatment

EAT is a program designed to help you keep eating and safely manage the most challenging foods you can throughout your radiation. The goal is to maintain your swallowing muscle function. 

Think of the foods you eat as a potential exercise for your throat muscles. The EAT Staircase (Figure 1.) describes different types of foods for your throat muscles – it starts from most challenging at the top and goes down to less challenging at the bottom.

You are likely eating foods around the top step right now, before you start your radiation. Your goal is to adjust your diet step-by-step as needed, rather than going down the staircase quickly. Your care team (speech pathologists, dietitians and radiation team) can help you with 
this goal. 

 
Figure 1. EAT Staircase. Goal: To keep eating challenging foods (top and middle of staircase) as long as you can during treatment. You are guided down the staircase, as needed, to manage radiation treatment side effects.
Hutcheson KA, Gomes A, Rodriguez V, Barringer D, Khan M, Martino R. Eat All Through Radiation Therapy (EAT-RT): Structured therapy model to facilitate continued oral intake through head and neck radiotherapy-User acceptance and content validation. Head Neck. 2020 Sep;42(9):2390-2396. doi: 10.1002/hed.26250. Epub 2020 May 23. PMID: 32445231.



