Lymphedema (Swelling)If you have radiation or surgery for your head and neck cancer, you will be at risk of developing lymphedema, or swelling, in your face, head, neck or nearby areas. Lymphedema is very common, with up to 75% of patients experiencing symptoms after treatment for their cancer.What Causes Lymphedema?The lymph system is made up of nodes and vessels that carry a clear fluid, called lymph, through the body.  Lymph is composed of proteins, salts, water, and white blood cells, and its function is to fight infection. The lymph system works with lymph fluid in much the same way that your circulatory system works with blood, by transporting its vital fluid through a network of vessels to the heart. The lymph system also includes lymph nodes, which are small bundles of tissue located along the lymph vessels. Their function is to filter harmful substances from lymph fluid. When the system is damaged by radiation or surgery, lymph fluid cannot flow back to the heart the way that is should.  It collects under the skin, causing swelling.Head and neck cancer patients are particularly vulnerable to lymphedema due to the large number of lymph nodes and vessels in and around the head and neck. In head and neck cancer, lymphedema can be caused by: Lymphedema typically occurs 2 to 6 months after treatment, but it can also occur years after treatment. Because it can be a long-term problem, it is best to get help for lymphedema as soon as possible. SymptomsLymphedema in head and neck cancer patients can happen almost anywhere in the face, head or neck. Swelling can be internal, in locations like the mouth, tongue, voice box, or throat. Or, the swelling can be external, occurring in the neck and face. While the location and severity vary from person to person, some symptoms to watch for include:Call your doctor right away if: DiagnosisAlthough some swelling is normal following surgery or radiation, any swelling that lasts longer than 6 weeks following treatment should be looked at by your doctor. He or she will do a physical exam and measure the swelling or use a standardized lymphedema scale to evaluate it. Your doctor will check to be sure there are no other causes of your swelling, such as a blood clot or infection.To make a definitive diagnosis of lymphedema, your doctor may order one of the following tests:If you are diagnosed with lymphedema, your doctor may determine its severity using an objective scoring system like the MD Anderson Cancer Center Head and Neck Lymphedema Scale, which uses 5 stages to describe lymphedema:Your doctor may monitor the progression of your lymphedema with standardized face and neck measurements for external swelling, and/or endoscopy to evaluate internal swelling. Prevention & ManagementThere are a number of steps you can take to reduce your risk of lymphedema or prevent it from getting worse. Your doctor may refer you to a physical therapist who can help. Management techniques include:If lymphedema does develop, it’s important to get treatment right away. The earlier treatment is started, the more successful it will be. Treatment for lymphedema most likely will consist of complete decongestive therapy (CDT). CDT includes:Lymphedema ResourcesLymphedema Rack CardThis informational card, perfect for physicians’ waiting rooms or exam rooms, lists strategies to detect symptoms, reduce risk and treating lymphedema.Lymphedema InfographicThis infographic is perfect to include on your website to visually share important facts, symptoms, risks and  treatment options for lymphedema.Downloadable Resource: Treating Lymphedema This downloadable resource can be printed or shared digitally and focuses on treating lymphedema.Downloadable Resource: Exercise & Stretching This downloadable resource can be printed or shared digitally and focuses on exercises and stretching techniques for lymphedema.Downloadable Resource: Posture, Positioning & Apparel This downloadable resource can be printed or shared digitally and focuses on posture, positioning and apparel to help reduce or manage lymphedema.Downloadable Resource: Skin Care This downloadable resource can be printed or shared digitally and focuses on skin care to reduce or manage lymphedema.Downloadable Resource: Diet & Medications This downloadable resource can be printed or shared digitally and focuses on diet and medications that may help manage lymphedema.HNCA Administrative Office:info@headandneck.orgPolicies & TermsCorporate Support StatementCopyright 2017 All Rights Reserved