Stanford H&N Surgery  Patient Passport  Therapeutic Transoral  Robotic Surgery  (TORS) Table of Content  Introduction										      3 Next Steps & Appointments							      5    PREOP											      6 INTRAOP											      7 POSTOP											7-13 It is a privilege and a pleasure to care for you.   To provide you with the best possible outcome and experience during treatment, we have prepared this educational passport for your care & learning.  Therapeutic transoral robotic surgery (TORS) is a minimally invasive surgery, performed entirely through the mouth under general anesthesia. The procedure lasts no more than 1-1.5 hours, during which the tumor is removed, with good surgical margins, performed by the robot using arms that your surgeon controls. By removing the tumor, we can reduce the risk of recurrence (in combination with the likelihood of adjuvant radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy) and less damage to healthy tissue.  The benefits of having a therapeutic TORS can lead to a quicker recovery versus traditional surgery, reduce the risk of complications, better swallowing function and, we hope, to decrease the risk of radiation and chemotherapy needed. Once we have removed the tumor via TORS, we will prep and perform a neck dissection. A neck dissection is usually performed to remove cancer that has spread to the lymph node(s) in the neck, medically known as a metastasis to the neck. In addition to removing lymph node(s), we also remove surrounding tissue from the neck. This portion of the procedure will take up to approximately 3-4 hours. Once the neck dissection has been performed, you will have a temporary JP drain to remove excess fluids. Once surgery has been performed,  your recovery depends on a variety of patient-specific factors as well as the complexity of the surgery.  Based on our experience with more than 200 patients who have undergone TORS, they start to feel normal in 1-2 weeks. However, immediately after surgery, you will be transferred to the PACU. Once you are well enough, you will be then transferred to the hospital where we will monitor your postoperative status. You should expect to be in the hospital from 3-5 days, depending on how you are doing it may be up to 7 days. Postoperative side effects from a TORS resection include difficulty swallowing and pain which based on our experience, most patients have significant troubles with, and additional side effects are bleeding, etc. Postoperative side effects from the neck dissection include bleeding, soreness, pain, minor spinal accessory nerve dysfunction resulting in post-operative shoulder syndrome, and/or temporary facial nerve paralysis.  Therefore, it is essential that we closely monitor you from up to 3-7 days after surgery while in the hospital to help manage the above complications. During your hospitalization, we will optimize your pain and swallowing management. Also, you will see our nutrition and speech, language pathology team to help ensure that you are ready to be discharged.  Nevertheless, HPV-mediated oropharyngeal cancers have a very good prognosis with very favorable outcomes.  Before surgery, we want to understand your symptoms.    Using the space below, please tell us if you are experiencing any of the following symptoms, on a scale of 1-10 and 10 being the worst:   Swallowing   0      	1      	2      	3      	4      	5      	6      	7      	8      	9      	10   Pain (of any kind: throat, ear, neck)     0      	1      	2      	3      	4      	5      	6      	7      	8      	9      	10   In the space below, please tell us if you are taking any pain medication, please tell us what you are taking, how much, and how often.  Please write here anything else that we should know about, including your thoughts, concerns, etc   What are the next steps after your consultation? Multidisciplinary Evaluation: You will also meet with our radiation & medical oncology teams, nutrition, and our speech language, and pathology team. We emphasize meeting these teams to better understand your treatment options.  You will be contacted by their department to schedule an appointment.  We will then discuss your case at our Head and Neck Tumor Board, which occurs Thursday evenings, where we will have a multidisciplinary discussion about your case regarding the best possible treatment option for you. While the above is happening, you will also need: PRE-OPERATIVE Appointment: At this appointment, we will discuss the surgery (Therapeutic TORS) in further detail, obtain surgical consent (written and verbal), potentially an endoscopic exam (if not already done at our initial visit), and to answer any additional questions you may have.  Our surgery scheduler, Ryan Thacker, will be in contact with you within the approximately 2 weeks of our consultation visit providing specific date(s) and time(s) regarding your surgery and additional action items, as listed below. Ryan Thacker may be reached at: Phone: (650) 724-5419 Fax: (650) 498-1303 PRE-OP: (650) 498-6000 Pre-anesthesia Appointment:  At this appointment you will meet with our anesthesia team for a history and physical exam.  You can reach the pre-anesthesia clinic: (650) 723-7125 Medical & Cardiac Preoperative Risk Assessment:  Additionally, you may need to see your primary care physician (PCP) or cardiologist to determine if it is safe for you to undergo surgery. Occasionally, they may want additional labs or imaging which must be done prior to surgery. If you do not have one, we are more than happy to refer you to a Stanford provider.   Regarding Medications:  We recommend that 1 week prior to your surgery you should not take any herbal supplements, vitamins, fish oils, anticoagulation and/or NSAIDS (Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs) such as Aspirin, Advil, Aleve, Ibuprofen, Motrin, or Naprosyn.  If you are taking anticoagulation (commonly known as blood thinners), we asked that you contact your primary care physician and anesthesia for further recommendations. PREOP: Once we have meet and elect to proceed with surgery: On the DAY BEFORE surgery: You will receive a phone call from our operating room (OR) staff between the hours of 3:00 to 7:00 PM the day prior to surgery. They will have the specific time of your surgery as well as when you should arrive at Stanford. If they do not contact you, please call (650) 723-7125. Since you are scheduled for a neck dissection in addition to TORS, you will receive chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG) cloths. We recommend cleaning your skin before surgery to reduce the risk of infection at your surgical site. Also, to make the cleaning easier, we provide 2 packs of disposable cloths moistened with a rinse-free, alcohol-free, 2% CHG antiseptic solution. The night before surgery, we recommend you shower and then use the first set of six cloths. The morning of surgery, please DO NOT shower and use the second set of six cloths.  During your hospital stay, you will be provided a gown and non-slipping socks. Additional items we recommend bringing are a cell phone and a cell phone charger for you to easily contact your family while you are hospitalized. We also recommend you, please, leave valuables at home, such as jewelry etc.  Your personal belongings will be placed in a safe and secured place while you are in surgery, and they will be returned to you once you are in your hospital room.  Also, please DO NOT eat or drink after midnight.  On the DAY OF SURGERY, our priority is to provide you with the highest level of care before, during, and after your surgery. We'll do our best to keep you and your family informed and comfortable.  As follows: If you need to take any morning medications as instructed, we asked you to take these with sips of water.  You will need to arrive at the Lane (Ambulatory) Surgery Center, which is located on 875 Blake Wilbur Drive, Stanford, California, 94305 in the Stanford Cancer Center on the 3rd floor, at which you will be called the day prior to which you will be told a specific time to arrive.  Please contact Guest Services at 650-498-333 for most up to date information regarding the visitor policy. A PRE-OP staff member will meet you at the admission desk to bring you to the PRE-OP area. Once you have been taken back to the PRE-OP area, you will be in a private bay in which you will be given a hospital gown to change into. You will then comfortably wait on a stretcher.   A nurse will conduct a brief interview and complete any necessary PRE-OP paperwork and orders. While you are in Pre-op you will meet with your Operating Room or Procedural team (surgeon, nurse, and anesthesiologist). This is a good time to ask any additional questions you may have. Your PRE-OP nurse will coordinate with you and your family the storage of your belongings and valuables. INTRAOP:  Once you are taken into the surgery room, you will meet the rest of our OR staff.  You will be given general anesthesia and will be prepped properly for the surgery.  Once the surgery starts, we will start with a direct laryngoscopy in which we will look in the back of your throat to have a better visualization of the tumor. Once we have a clear and precise understanding of where the tumor is, we will use the robot which is performed with a two-handed instrument and magnification to remove the tumor, with good surgical margins.
 Once we have removed the tumor in the back of your throat, with good margins, we will send the specimen to our pathology team to have a final diagnosis. The pathology will take up to 7-10 days to finalize, for this reason is because we want to ensure that we are making the appropriate diagnosis.  As we finish the TORS aspect of the procedure, we will use dissolvable stitches to help close the resected site(s) made in the back of your throat.  We will then prepare for the next portion of the surgery, the neck dissection. We will make an incision, usually along a skin crease, in the appropriate side of the neck. We will then surgically remove the lymph node(s) and surrounding tissue.  Once the neck dissection is completed, you will have a temporary  Jackson-Pratt (JP) drain placed. The JP drain operates as a self-suction to remove excess fluid from around the incision site, also to help promote healing off the incision and decrease the risk of infection.  During all of this, we will make every effort to keep your family members and friends informed in a timely and consistent manner. POSTOP:  FOLLOWING SURGERY, you will be taken to the recovery room and your family will be notified. You will then be transferred to the hospital where we will monitor your status and optimize your pain and swallowing management. Expect to stay from at least 3-5 days, and depending how you feel it may be up to 7 days. It is important to know that the major postoperative compilations are PAIN & SWALLOWING. Based on previous experience with more than 200 patients undergoing TORS, pain management is the most significant postoperatively. Patients typically require, for a short period of time, oxycodone to help with swallowing normally. Swallowing normally is important for nutrition. However, the active eating and swallowing liquids and solids promotes healing in the back of the throat.  Therefore, during your stay in the hospital, you will see our Speech, Language and Pathology team to assess your swallowing. In very rare cases, patients will have a feeding tube placed (less than 5%).  Please tell us how you are feeling following your surgery regarding pain and swallowing. Please also take note that other expected postoperative complications & expectations may include: Bleeding: You may encounter blood-tinged secretions. If the bleeding worsens, please notify your staff immediately via MyHealth or calling our office. Oropharyngeal bleeding can be life threatening after robotic surgery and you must seek immediate care if you encounter large oral bleeding. Sloughing of tissue: You may spit out scabs from the back of your throat. It is very important NOT to pick or manipulate the tissue in the back of your throat while it is healing so that you DO NOT disrupt a clot or a scab that is meant to be there. Documenting with pictures: If you have any questions or concerns about your recovery, please take a picture and bring it with you to your follow up appointment or send us a message via MyHealth. “Spitting out” a stitch: It is safe to spit them out if they become dislodged. During surgery, dissolvable stitches were placed in the back of your throat. Dehydration: We strongly encourage you to stay adequately hydrated because by not drinking enough liquids you may ultimately dry out the mucosa in your mouth and throat that is trying to heal, causing more discomfort. Numbness: A typical and expected postoperative side effect usually at the neck incision radiating from the incision, neck, and earlobe, which may last up to weeks to months. This is due to division of the small unspecified cutaneous (skin) nerves and the stretching of these nerves such as the great auricular nerve. Once you have been DISCHARGED from the hospital, it is IMPORTANT to control your pain to help with your swallowing and your ability to eat for a faster recovery.  	
You may be prescribed the following: Oxycodone (liquid form): 5-10 mg every 4-6 hours. Tylenol (tablets): 500 mg every 4 hours OR 1,000 mg every 6 hours (It is important to note to take no more than 4000 mg total / day)				 Gabapentin (liquid form): 300 mg every 8 hours.	 MiraLAX (powder), a stool softener, is prescribed for constipation related to narcotics. Please mix with your food once a day.  It is important to know that the liquid forms of Oxycodone and Gabapentin are difficult to find at community pharmacies. Tylenol is prescribed in tablets because the liquid formulation can be expensive and requires a high volume to achieve the same dose. You may crush the Tylenol tabs if they are difficult to swallow. In addition to managing your pain and swallowing, it is important to stay vigilant about proper ORAL CARE.    We recommend using salt & soda oral rinses at least 10-20x daily, before and after meals, in the morning when waking, and at bedtime. Why? The normal human mouth is full of naturally occurring bacteria, and with routine dental care, these bacteria may be helpful for us. However, after surgery, these bacteria can take advantage of the open wound from surgery.  Therefore, bacterial overgrowth may result in delayed wound healing. The use of a mixture of baking soda and salt rinse is to help debride, or exfoliate, the oral cavity/oropharyngeal mucosal wounds keeping the area clean and to promote healing. This may increase your oral intake and to debride the surgical areas with soft foods is also essential during your recovery.  The recipe is as follows: Baking soda and salt mix:  1 cup of water, ¼ teaspoon of baking soda, ⅛ teaspoon of salt.  Instructions:  Please swish and spit the mixture hourly, especially after meals, when you wake up, and at bedtime Avoid store-bought mouthwashes, which often contain alcohol or other irritants.  Your nutritional intake/diet is also very important.   We recommend your nutritional intake to be ~2000 kcal/day AND approximately eight, 64 oz of water a day minimum, as your body is healing and needs extra nutrition.  Food intake includes: Eating a mechanical soft diet consisting of foods that are chopped, ground or pureed in texture like: cream of wheat, avocado, cottage cheese, yogurt, pureed fruit (applesauce), white rice, egg noodles, mashed potatoes, mango, bananas, scrambled eggs, refried beans, flaky fish, ground meats, tofu are a few options. Consider a protein shake like Ensure Plus/Boost Plus or an equivalent and sip between meals. Please AVOID any SHARP foods or anything that require excessive chewing for at least two weeks after surgery.  Also AVOID whole wheat, whole grain breads, raw vegetables, berries, beans, nuts, peanuts Liquid Oral Intake includes: ~8, 8oz glasses of water daily minimum Drink water, herbal teas, and/or Gatoradem because of the sensitivity of the mucosa.  Drink room temperature liquids to prevent charring/discomfort of the surgical wound. Consider a protein shake like Ensure Plus/Boost Plus or an equivalent and sip between meals. AVOID acidic products like orange juice or tomato products It is also important to have prior wound care given that a NECK DISSECTION was performed. We encourage that for wound care, you should focus on: Vaseline: Please apply once the steri-strips have fallen off, at least twice daily. You may leave the incision uncovered.  Hygiene: You may shower as you normally would the day after surgery. Please do not submerge your wound in water (bath, tub, pool) as this may increase the risk of infection.  Please use a gentle soap, preferably nonirritating. Avoid heavy lifting: We strongly advised for the first 1-2 weeks, DO NOT lift anything greater than 5-10 pounds (or a gallon of milk) until discussing with your surgeon. Also, please DO NOT bend over for prolonged periods of time.  These may increase your bleeding risk.  Jackson-Pratt (JP) Drain (if not already taken out prior to discharge): Please empty the drain once daily (or as needed if it is full). Please make sure the bulb is collapsed (so it is acting as a suction). Also, please record the drain output and bring the documentation with you. AVOID: We recommend NOT to twist or bend your neck as much as possible. Be careful when shaving to avoid dislodging a staple or suture.  ALSO, after a neck dissection, there can be weakness of your spinal accessory nerve.  This nerve controls both the shoulder muscles that lifts your arm out to the side of your body. Typical activities relating to your spinal accessory nerve includes getting dressed and/or lifting items above your head. You may also experience some deltoid atrophy. Therefore, an outpatient referral may be placed to our physical therapy team (if needed). We have partnered with our Redwood City physical therapy team, Alison Taba and her team, who are experts at helping you regain your mobility and strength.  If you decide to have physical therapy, it is essential to maintain a good compliance with the exercises for a better recovery and muscle strengthening.  If you think you would benefit from physical therapy to increase neck mobility and strength, you may contact at (650) 725-5106. Their office location is 450 Broadway Street, Redwood City, CA.  What are your next steps following therapeutic TORS? You will be seen by our Physician Associate, Becky Tsang, for a postoperative evaluation. At this appointment, we will assess your recovery since the surgery and if you have a drain, we will remove this as well.  Once you meet with Becky, your case will be re-presented to our Head and Neck Tumor Board for a treatment recommendation. This will be based on your final pathology, which will take about 1-2 weeks to finalize.  We would like to better understand your symptoms now that you have had the chance to return home and recover. So, on the next page, please tell us how the pain and swallowing is on the scale of 1-10 (10 being the worst). If you are using any medications, how much and how often.  Also, please indicate which POST OP Day you are in. If you are discharged earlier than expected, you may start the POST OP Day on the next page on whichever day you left off. Example: if you were discharged on postop day #6, on the next page please start with POST OP Day #7. AGAIN, your swallowing and pain will be poorly tolerated as you return home. Therefore, to expedite the healing process, we recommend you take pain medication (that has been prescribed to you, and if not, please contact our office and we will be more than happy to) to help you eat and swallow.  It is also important to note that for the first couple of days, you will most likely not tolerate solid foods, therefore, we recommend that you start with soft/liquids such as ensure boots, etc. Resources: Stanford Head and Neck Cancer Support Group: meets first Tuesday of every month from 4:00pm-5:30pm at 875 Blake Wilbur Drive, 2nd Floor, Room CC2104. For questions, call (650) 223-1422. Website: https://stanfordhealthcare.org/events/head-and-neck-cancer-support-group.html Head and Neck Cancer Alliance: https://www.headandneck.org/  Use the space below, please tell us about your experience with your initial diagnosis, the preoperative phase (before surgery), the surgery (TORS), postoperative phase (following surgery), and the next steps. Also, please add anything additional that you think may help us make this process easier for the near future.