Stanford H&N Surgery 
  

Patient Passport 
Diagnostic Transoral 
Robotic Surgery 
(TORS)
  

Table of Content 


Introduction                                                                                   3
Next Steps & Appointments                                                           5   
PREOP                                                                                           6
INTRAOP                                                                                           7
POSTOP                                                                                      7-12












































































It is a privilege and a pleasure to care for you.  


To provide you with the best possible outcome and experience during treatment, we have prepared this educational passport for your care & learning. 


Diagnostic transoral robotic surgery (TORS) is a minimally invasive surgery, performed entirely through the mouth and under general anesthesia. The procedure lasts no more than 1 hour, during which biopsies of the throat are performed by the robot using arms that your surgeon controls. By using TORS, we are able to increase the likelihood of identifying the source of the unknown primary tumors. 


The benefits of having TORS is a quicker recovery versus to traditional surgery, reduce the risk of complications, better swallowing function postoperatively, and, we hope, to decrease the risk of radiation and chemotherapy needed (oftentimes, radiation and chemotherapy are not needed depending on the final pathology). 


The risks include bleeding, respiratory issues,  pain, and/or altered taste.  Trouble or difficulty swallowing can lead to aspiration of food or liquid into the lungs.  However, with carefully swallowing rehabilitation afterwards the risk of these complications can be minimized. 


Once surgery has been performed,  your recovery depends on a variety of patient-specific factors as well as the complexity of the surgery. Since we are performing a diagnostic only TORS, the recovery is relatively quickly.  Most patients are back to normal in 1-2 weeks. However, immediately after surgery, you will be observed in the hospital for 23 hours.  However, in the first couple of days you will experience some pain and difficulty swallowing but should improve in 7-14 days. 


Nevertheless, HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancers have a very good prognosis with very favorable outcomes. 






































Before surgery, we want to understand your symptoms – at baseline.   


Using the space below, please tell us if you are experiencing any of the following symptoms, on a scale of 1-10 and 10 being the worst: 


Swallowing


0        1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9        10 


Pain (of any kind: throat, ear, neck)
 


0        1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9        10


In the space below, please tell us if you are taking any pain medication, please tell us what you are taking, how much, and how often.  Please write here anything else that we should know about, including your thoughts, concerns, etc




	



Next Steps:


PRE-OPERATIVE Appointment:
At this appointment, we will discuss the surgery (diagnostic TORS) in further detail, obtain surgical consent (written and verbal), potentially an endoscopic exam (if not already done), and to answer any additional questions you may have. 


Our surgery scheduler, Ryan Thacker, will be in contact with you within the 2 weeks of our consultation visit providing specific date(s) and time(s) regarding your surgery and additional action items, as listed below.


Ryan Thacker may be reached at:
Phone: (650) 724-5419
Fax: (650) 498-1303


PRE-OP: (650) 498-6000


Pre-anesthesia Appointment: 
At this appointment you will meet with our anesthesia team for a history and physical exam. 


You can reach the pre-anesthesia clinic: (650) 723-7125


Medical & Cardiac Preoperative Risk Assessment: 
Additionally, you may need to see your primary care physician (PCP) or cardiologist to determine if it is safe for you to undergo surgery. Occasionally, they may want additional labs or imaging which must be done prior to surgery. If you do not have one, we are more than happy to refer you to a Stanford provider.  


Medications: 
We recommend that 1 week prior to your surgery you should not take any herbal supplements, vitamins, fish oils, anticoagulation and/or NSAIDS (Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs) such as Aspirin, Advil, Aleve, Ibuprofen, Motrin, or Naprosyn. 


If you are taking anticoagulation (commonly known as blood thinners), we asked that you contact your primary care physician and anesthesia for further recommendations.


You will also meet with our radiation & medical oncology teams, nutrition, and our speech, language, and pathology team. We emphasize meeting these teams to better understand your treatment options.


We will then discuss your case at our Head and Neck Tumor Board, which occurs Thursday evenings, where we will have a multidisciplinary discussion about your case regarding the best possible treatment options for you.












PREOP: 


Once we have meet and elect to proceed with surgery:


On the DAY BEFORE surgery:
1. You will receive a phone call from our operating room (OR) staff between the hours of 3:00 to 7:00 PM the day prior to surgery. They will have the specific time of your surgery as well as when you should arrive at Stanford. If they do not contact you, please call (650) 723-7125.
2. If you are scheduled for a neck dissection in addition to TORS, you will receive chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG) cloths. We recommend cleaning your skin before surgery to reduce the risk of infection at your surgical site. Also, to make the cleaning easier, we provide 2 packs of disposable cloths moistened with a rinse-free, alcohol-free, 2% CHG antiseptic solution. The night before surgery, we recommend you shower and then use the first set of six cloths. The morning of surgery, please DO NOT shower and use the second set of six cloths. 
3. During your hospital stay, you will be provided a gown and non-slipping socks. Additional items we recommend bringing are a cell phone and a cell phone charger for you to easily contact your family while you are hospitalized. We also recommend you, please, leave valuables at home, such as jewelry etc.  Your personal belongings will be placed in a safe and secured place while you are in surgery, and they will be returned to you once you are in your hospital room. 
4. Also, please DO NOT eat or drink after midnight. 


On the DAY OF SURGERY, our priority is to provide you with the highest level of care before, during, and after your surgery. We'll do our best to keep you and your family informed and comfortable. 


As follows:
1. If you need to take any morning medications as instructed, we asked you to take these with sips of water. 
2. You will need to arrive at the Lane (Ambulatory) Surgery Center, which is located on 875 Blake Wilbur Drive, Stanford, California, 94305 in the Stanford Cancer Center on the 3rd floor, at which you will be called the day prior to which you will be told a specific time to arrive. 
   * Please contact Guest Services at 650-498-333 for most up to date information regarding the visitor policy.
3. A PRE-OP staff member will meet you at the admission desk to bring you to the PRE-OP area. Once you have been taken back to the PRE-OP area, you will be in a private bay in which you will be given a hospital gown to change into. You will then comfortably wait on a stretcher.   A nurse will conduct a brief interview and complete any necessary PRE-OP paperwork and orders. While you are in Pre-op you will meet with your Operating Room or Procedural team (surgeon, nurse, and anesthesiologist). This is a good time to ask any additional questions you may have.
4. Your PRE-OP nurse will coordinate with you and your family the storage of your belongings and valuables.
















INTRAOP: 


Once you are taken into the surgery room, you will meet the rest of our OR staff. 


You will be given general anesthesia and will be prepped properly for the surgery. 


Once the surgery starts, we will start with a direct laryngopharyngoscopy due to the unclear nature of the primary tumor. By doing this, it will help us to determine if there is an obvious primary tumor that could be identified.  


Then, the use of the robot is performed with a two-handed instrument and magnification to biopsy multiple sites of the area of concern within the oropharynx (the back of the throat). Once we have taken the biopsies, they will be sent to our pathology department for further review. 


As we finish the diagnostic TORS, we will use dissolvable stitches to help close the biopsy sites made in the back of your throat. 


During all of this, we will make every effort to keep your family members and friends informed in a timely and consistent manner.


POSTOP: 


FOLLOWING SURGERY, you will be taken to the recovery room and your family will be notified. You will then be transferred to the hospital where your expected stay is approximately 23 hours for observation, or additional days, if needed. 


It is important to know that the major postoperative compilations is PAIN & SWALLOWING: Based on previous experience with more than 200 patients undergoing TORS, pain management is the most significant postoperatively. Patients typically require, for a short period of time, oxycodone to help with swallowing normally. Swallowing normally is important for nutrition. However, the active eating and swallowing liquids and solids promotes healing in the back of the throat. 


Therefore, during your stay in the hospital, you will see our Speech, Language and Pathology team to assess your swallowing.


Please also take note, that other expected postoperative complications & expectations may include:
1. Bleeding: You may encounter blood-tinged secretions. If the bleeding worsens, please notify your staff immediately via MyHealth or calling our office. Oropharyngeal bleeding can be life threatening after robotic surgery and you must seek immediate care if you encounter large oral bleeding.
2. Sloughing of tissue: You may spit out scabs from the back of your throat. It is very important NOT to pick or manipulate the tissue in the back of your throat while it is healing so that you DO NOT disrupt a clot or a scab that is meant to be there.
3. Documenting with pictures: If you have any questions or concerns about your recovery, please take a picture and bring it with you to your follow up appointment or send us a message via MyHealth.
4. “Spitting out” a stitch: It is safe to spit them out if they become dislodged. During surgery, dissolvable stitches were placed in the back of your throat.
5. Dehydration: We strongly encourage you to stay adequately hydrated because by not drinking enough liquids you may ultimately dry out the mucosa in your mouth and throat that is trying to heal, causing more discomfort.


Please tell us how you are feeling following your surgery regarding pain and/or swallowing.


Swallowing, on post op day #1:


0        1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9        10


Pain (of any kind: throat, ear, neck), on post op day #1:


0        1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9        10


Also, in the space below, please note how much medication you are taking and how often. 




	

Once you are DISCHARGED from the hospital, it is important to control your pain to help with your swallowing and your ability to eat for a faster recovery. 
        
You may be prescribed the following:
1. Oxycodone (liquid form): 5-10 mg every 4-6 hours.
2. Tylenol (tablets): 500 mg every 4 hours OR 1,000 mg every 6 hours (It is important to note to take no more than 4000 mg total / day)                                
3. Gabapentin (liquid form): 300 mg every 8 hours.        
4. MiraLAX (powder), a stool softener, is prescribed for constipation related to narcotics. Please mix with your food once a day. 
It is important to know that the liquid forms of Oxycodone and Gabapentin are difficult to find at community pharmacies. Tylenol is prescribed in tablets because the liquid formulation can be expensive and requires a high volume to achieve the same dose. You may crush the Tylenol tabs if they are difficult to swallow. 






In addition to managing your pain and swallowing, it is important to stay vigilant about proper oral care. 
 
We recommend using salt & soda oral rinses at least 10-20x daily, before and after meals, in the morning when waking, and at bedtime. Why? The normal human mouth is full of naturally occurring bacteria, and with routine dental care, these bacteria may be helpful for us. However, after surgery, these bacteria can take advantage of the open wound from surgery.  Therefore, bacterial overgrowth may result in delayed wound healing.


The use of a mixture of baking soda and salt rinse is to help debride, or exfoliate, the oral cavity/oropharyngeal mucosal wounds keeping the area clean and to promote healing. This may increase your oral intake and to debride the surgical areas with soft foods is also essential during your recovery. 


The recipe is as follows:
1. Baking soda and salt mix: 
   1. 1 cup of water, ¼ teaspoon of baking soda, ⅛ teaspoon of salt. 
2. Instructions:
   1.  Please swish and spit the mixture hourly, especially after meals, when you wake up, and at bedtime
   2. Avoid store-bought mouthwashes, which often contain alcohol or other irritants. 


Your nutritional intake/diet is also very important.  


We recommend your nutritional intake to be ~2000 kcal/day AND approximately eight, 64 oz of water a day minimum, as your body is healing and needs extra nutrition. 


Food intake includes:
1. Eating a mechanical soft diet consisting of avocado, cottage cheese, pureed fruit (applesauce), white rice, egg noodles, mashed potatoes, mango, bananas, and etc.
2. Please AVOID any SHARP foods or anything that require excessive chewing for at least two weeks after surgery.  Also AVOID whole wheat, whole grain breads, raw vegetables, berries, beans, nuts, peanuts


Liquid Oral Intake includes:
1. ~8, 8oz glasses of water daily minimum
2. Drink water, herbal teas, and/or Gatoradem because of the sensitivity of the mucosa. 
3. Drink room temperature liquids to prevent charring/discomfort of the surgical wound.
4. AVOID acidic products like orange juice or tomato products










Now that you are home and recovering from surgery, please tell us how your swallowing and pain are doing (on a scale from 1-10). If you are using any medications, how much and how often.
Post Op Day #2: 
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:


Post Op Day #3:
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:


Post Op Day #4:
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:


Post Op Day #5:
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:


Post Op Day #6:
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:


Post Op Day #7:
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:


Post Op Day #8:
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:


Post Op Day #9:
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:


Post Op Day #10:
Swallowing (    ), Pain (     )
Use of Medication & Frequency:




Additional Comments:








	What are the next steps following your diagnostic TORS?


You will have 2 postoperative evaluations. 


For your POSTOPERATIVE evaluation #1, you will see Becky Tsang (Physician Associate). At this appointment, we will assess your recovery since the surgery.  


For your POSTOPERATIVE evaluation #2, you will be seen by Dr. Holsinger to further assess your recovery journey, and to discuss your pathology results and the next steps & expectations of your care. 


Additional Resources:
1. Stanford Head and Neck Cancer Support Group: meets first Tuesday of every month from 4:00pm-5:30pm at 875 Blake Wilbur Drive, 2nd Floor, Room CC2104. For questions, call (650) 223-1422. Website: https://stanfordhealthcare.org/events/head-and-neck-cancer-support-group.html


2. Head and Neck Cancer Alliance: https://www.headandneck.org/ 






































Use the space below, please tell us how you are feeling about your experience with your initial diagnosis, the preoperative phase (before surgery), the surgery (diagnostic TORS), postoperative phase (following surgery), and the next steps. Also, please add anything additional that you think may help us make this process easier for the near future.