Oropharyngeal Surgery Post-Operative Care

Swallowing
1.   On the day of surgery or the day after, you will be seen by the Head and Neck Speech and Swallowing Rehabilitation team.
2.   Usually you can have solids or soft food as tolerated. Avoid sharp foods (or foods that requiring long chewing) for about 2 weeks after surgery.

Oral Care
1.   Baking soda and salt rinses at least 10 times a day: before and after meals, before bedtime, and upon waking. This helps debride, or exfoliate, the oral cavity/oropharyngeal mucosal wounds keeping the area clean and promoting healing. 
2.   Bacteria overgrowth peaks between days 7-14 and that is when bleeding risk is highest, as when someone doesn't brush their teeth then suddenly bites into an apple and causing gums to bleed. The same is true here, just magnified. 
3.   Increasing oral intake and continuing to debride the surgical areas with soft foods is so important post-operatively. 

Diet and Nutrition
1.   Increase your nutritional intake to 2500-3000 kcal/day and 8-8oz glasses of water a day minimum.
2.  We’d like you to be seen by one of our nutritionist to maximize nutrition. 

Shoulder Rehabilitation if Neck Dissection is Performed

1.   Physical therapy for shoulder exercises are often necessary if you have had a neck dissection as part of your surgery. 
2.   Shoulder exercises for trapezius for at least 2 months minimum post-operatively because of dissection along accessory spinal nerve. This dissection strips the blood supply from the nerve and if not rehabilitated can cause weakness long term. 

Numbness after Neck Dissection
1.   After the skin of the neck is incised, there will be numbness over the incision, neck and earlobe for weeks to months. This is due to division of the small un-named cutaneous nerves and stretching of nerves such as the great auricular nerve. 

 Pain Control and Bowel Function
1.	Pain regimen should be maximized to taking something every 6 hours for pain to allow for adequate sleep and oral intake, both of which are critical to post-surgical recovery. 
2.	Narcotic pain medication causes constipation. You will be prescribed medication to prevent constipation.
