It was a pleasure seeing you in the Stanford Head & Neck Surgical Oncology Clinic. Thank you for allowing us to be a part of your care. 
 
Follow-up instructions: 
 
- Referrals:  The providers and/or departments listed below will be contacting you to schedule an appointment for referrals that have been made on your behalf: 
 

- Imaging / Radiology Test Scheduling: The Radiology Department will contact you to schedule an appointment. The following imaging has been ordered:


- Laboratory Tests:  Please go to the laboratory on the first floor to get your blood drawn before you go home today.
 
 
Information for Radiology and other Scheduling and Requests: 
 
MRI, CT Scans, mammograms, ultrasounds, and core biopsies require insurance authorization prior to scheduling an appointment. Insurance authorization can take up to 5 working days. When insurance authorization has been obtained, you will receive a call from the Radiology Department. If you are not contacted, please call (650) 723-6855.
 
Scheduling: 
 
Normally, you can schedule a follow-up visit with the check-out clerk. When you are home, you can call the following numbers to schedule an appointment: 
 
Follow-up appointments: 650-498-6000 
Radiology test scheduling: 650-723-6855 (CT, PET scan, bone, etc.) 
Chemotherapy, ITA: 650-498-6000 
Radiation Oncology: call 650-498-6339 
 
We encourage you to sign up for My Health so that you are able to look at your medical records online. Please call 866-367-0758 to enroll. 
When you are sending messages in My Health, please direct the messages to Dr. Holsinger, so other entire team is able to view the messages and respond to you quicker.
 
"At Stanford Head and Neck Surgical Oncology, we strive to provide an outstanding patient experience, and we value your feedback at any point throughout your journey.  You may also receive a survey in the mail, and we would appreciate your time and willingness to complete this as it will help ensure that we are meeting our goal and let us know of any areas that may need improvement."