Xerostomia/ Dry Mouth: Suggestions for Help
Radiation therapy to the head and neck areas, chemotherapy, and some medicines may cause dry mouth or thick saliva. The glands that make saliva are very sensitive to radiation and oftten stop producing the thin, watery saliva during radiation.  You may notice your mouth is dry or that you have thick, sticky, ropy mucous. Short-term, dry mouth can make it difficult to eat drier foods and may lead to longer meal times.  You may also notice you are more sensitive to spices and acidic foods since there is no saliva to serve as a barrier in your mouth. Long-term,  dry mouth can increase your risk of dental issues like cavities as saliva typically works as a protective barrier for our teeth. 
?	Drink 8 to 10 cups of liquid a day (water is best), and take a water bottle wherever you go. (Drinking lots of fluids helps thin mucus.)
?	Use a humidifier to moisten room air, especially at night. The humidifier should be as close to your head as possible. (Be sure to keep the humidifier clean to avoid spreading bacteria or mold in the air.)
?	Take small bites, and chew your food well.
?	Eat soft, moist foods.. 
?	Avoid foods that stick to the roof of the mouth like peanut butter or soft bread.
?	Moisten foods with broth, soup, sauces, gravy, yogurt, or creams. 
?	Suck on sugarless candy or chew sugarless gum to stimulate saliva. 
?	Keep your mouth clean. Rinse your mouth before and after meals with plain water or a mild mouth rinse (made with 1 quart water, 1 teaspoon salt, and 1 teaspoon baking soda – shake well before using). Use a soft-bristle toothbrush. It's a good idea to gently brush your tongue, too. Ask your doctor if it's OK to floss. 
?	Use the baking soda, salt water rinse above to maintain a more normal pH balance in your mouth.
?	Avoid commercial mouthwashes, alcoholic and acidic drinks, and tobacco.
?	Limit caffeine intake, from coffee, tea, energy drinks, and caffeinated soft drinks.
?	Avoid carbonated beverages which can cause irritation.
?	Many patients like Xylimelt lozenges for more durable salivary stimulation.
?	Try applying coconut oil to the roof of your mouth or swish it in your mouth before eating.
?	Acupuncture can be beneficial for restoring saliva, particularly after radiation therapy is complete.
?	Fresh papaya may help to stimulate saliva production and provides a protective barrier in the mouth.
?	Saliva substitutes are helpful if your salivary glands have been removed by surgery or damaged by radiation therapy. These products add moisture to your mouth. Biotene is one commercially available product which is easy to find at most drug stores.
